---
title: So it goes
output:
  md_document:
    variant: gfm+footnotes
    preserve_yaml: TRUE
knit: (function(inputFile, encoding) {
  rmarkdown::render(inputFile, encoding = encoding, output_dir = "../_posts") })
date: 2022-03-31
permalink: /posts/2022/03/so-it-goes
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
toc: false
header:
 og_image: "posts/so-it-goes/date_hist-1.png"
tags:
  - career
  - visualization
---

When I was applying to graduate school and asking for letters of
recommendation from my undergrad professors, one of them told me to give
academia three years, and that if I hadn’t found a permanent position by
then, to find another career. It’s been three years, and next week I
start a new job as a data scientist. I read a fair bit of [quit
lit](https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2021/08/18/reading-academic-quit-lit-how-and-why-precarious-scholars-leave-academia)
in my first couple years of grad school and always told myself that if I
went that same route, I would never pen any of my own…

<!--more-->

Two things have changed since then. One: an already precarious academic
job market that never recovered from the global financial crisis has
imploded even further. Two: opportunities for people with the set of
skills you pick up in a quantitative social science PhD program have
exploded. Quit lit is often deeply personal and centered around the path
one took to deciding to leave academia; see [this
piece](https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2018/04/04/comparison-quit-lit-1970s-and-today-opinion)
for links to several prominent examples.[^1] This is not that kind of
quit lit, because that’s not where my communication skills are
strongest. Instead, I’m writing this post to illustrate the contrast
between my academic and nonacademic job search processes in the hopes
that it may be a useful data point for current grad students, postdocs,
adjuncts, and maybe even some early-career faculty.[^2] When reading
this post, bear in mind that I am presenting data from an *n* of one,
and my experiences may not generalize outside of quantitative social
science, or even very far within it.

{% capture notice-text %} I had an enormous amount of support in this
process from both my institutions and my networks; in no way could I
have gotten a data science job as easily on my own. I’ll talk more about
the help I received at some point in the future. {% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--danger">

{{ notice-text | markdownify }}

</div>

Let’s get straight to the numbers. Out of 142 jobs I applied to, I
received two job offers. That’s a 98.6% rejection rate.[^3] Visualizing
this (with apologies to [Andrew
Heiss](https://www.andrewheiss.com/blog/2018/12/17/academic-job-market-visualized))
looks like so.

<img src="/images/posts/so-it-goes/waffle_combined-1.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

Five jobs expressed interest me beyond my initial application, which
translates to a 3.5% response rate. The ‘Nothing’ category encompasses
both jobs that sent me an automated HR rejection email (often several
months after their chosen candidate had accepted the offer) as well as
ones that never got back to me. Many searches for faculty positions will
conduct Zoom/Skype/Teams interviews with their long short list of
candidates before inviting the short list to an on-campus visit,
colloquially termed a flyout, but some may skip straight to the
on-campus visit. Some postdoc positions conduct virtual interviews,
while others simply make an offer to their preferred candidate. I used a
rough ranking of potential outcomes as Offer &gt; Flyout ≥ Interview
&gt; Rejection in constructing this plot, with each dot representing the
final outcome for that application.

I applied to a wide range of permanent (tenure-track and teaching-track)
faculty positions, as well as a number of temporary (postdoc, visiting
assistant professor, lecturer) positions. Splitting my applications
along this dimension shows that I had noticeably more success in my
applications for temporary positions (10.3% response rate) than
permanent ones (1.8% response rate).

<img src="/images/posts/so-it-goes/waffle_split-1.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

Since my non-nothing outcomes are so few, I can easily list them in more
detail:

-   Two postdoc offers
-   A postdoc I interviewed for and declined in favor of another postdoc
    offer
-   A teaching-track flyout I declined in favor of a data science offer
-   A tenure-track interview I declined in favor of the same offer

If we break down the jobs I applied for by academic subfield, some
unsurprising patterns emerge. Data science jobs include those listed as
computational social science, jobs listed for a substantive subfield and
methods are coded under the substantive area, and international
relations, conflict, peace studies, security studies, and international
political economy are all represented in the IR category.

<img src="/images/posts/so-it-goes/bar_subfield-1.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

The majority of jobs I applied to (92) were advertised as international
relations. While much of my [research](/research) sits at the
intersection of international relations and comparative politics, very
few of the jobs I applied to do. I didn’t track how frequent these jobs
are, so it could just be a case of few jobs to apply to. Data science
(24) handily outnumbers the more traditional subfield of methods (14),
reflecting increasing interest in the former by the discipline.

The map below geographically visualizes the jobs I applied to. Each
circle represents one institution, with the size of the circle denoting
how many positions I applied for. I applied to five positions at UCSD,
the most of any institution.

<img src="/images/posts/so-it-goes/map-1.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

I focused primarily on the Eastern US and California. I applied to jobs
in 31 states and the District of Columbia, meaning there were 19 states
I did not apply to any jobs in. Looking at my applications over time
helps tell the story of my academic job search process.

<img src="/images/posts/so-it-goes/date_hist-1.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

The 2018-19 academic job market season was my final year of grad school.
I wanted to be done, so I applied to a wide variety of jobs. The postdoc
I received an offer from was actually the last position I applied for in
this cycle. I was a little more selective in the 2019-20 job market
season because I had an excellent postdoc, with a high chance of a
second year of funding. I started a new postdoc in 2020 and knew that I
had a second year of funding guaranteed. COVID-19 absolutely devastated
the job market that cycle as well. With a second year of funding secure
and precious few institutions hiring, I decided to spend my time
focusing on improving my CV and applied to a total of four jobs that
cycle, all tenure-track. The market somewhat recovered in the 2021-22
cycle, but there were still far fewer jobs than in my first two cycles.
I applied to 19 jobs this cycle, all of them permanent. There were some
great postdocs this cycle, but three years as a postdoc had been enough
for me.

Two jobs did show interest in me this last cycle, but it was too little,
too late. I had an offer for a data science job when I received an
on-campus interview for one job, and had already accepted the offer when
I received a Zoom interview for another. Given the typical pace of an
academic search, it was possible that even if I were successful in
getting an offer for either of these positions, it wouldn’t be for
another month or two. My postdoc ended in June, and an offer in hand
doing interesting research was an easy sell compared to that
uncertainty.

Across all 142 applications, I ended up submitting 399 letters of
recommendation to search committees. I was very fortunate that UNC has a
department administrator handle letters for grad students as a sort of
discount (read: free) Interfolio Dossier service. They generously
provide this service to graduates of the department until they secure
their first permanent job, even after they have left. I spent so long on
the academic job market that I had no less than three different people
help me with this process. I am incredibly grateful for their efforts
and want to highlight the support they gave me.

I haven’t done as good of a job tracking my applications to nonacademic
jobs because the process is much less structured and standardized. Some
applications require a cover letter, so I can count up all the cover
letters saved in my job search folder: 25. You can also apply for many
jobs with just a résumé. Let’s say I applied to 10 of those, which makes
35 applications total.

<img src="/images/posts/so-it-goes/waffle_nonac-1.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

I started the interview process with seven of these employers.
Acknowledging some uncertainty in the denominator, that’s a 20% response
rate, more than six times higher than my academic response rate of 3.5%.
I completed the interview process with four of these employers,
receiving one rejection and three offers (I withdrew from the other
three interview processes after accepting one of those offers). A 75%
interview success rate is pretty incredible compared to my experience on
the academic job market. That’s an overall success rate of 8.6%, which
is also more than six times higher than my overall success rate for
academic jobs.

Or is it a 50% success rate? I actually interviewed for two different
positions with two of these employers, so you could also slice the data
less favorably and say I received offers for three out of six positions
I interviewed for. That’s still an overall success rate of 8.1%, which
is pretty damn good in my eyes. I also want to highlight some of the
experiences I had on the nonacademic job market that I can’t imagine
ever happening on the academic one:

-   Recruiters reached out to me to ask me to apply to positions
-   One employer alerted me to another position they were hiring for and
    connected me with the hiring manager for it
-   Another informed me that I was actually overqualified for the
    position I applied for and considered me for a more senior position
    instead
-   I had my first job offer almost exactly three months after I started
    my nonacademic job search in earnest
-   I received three job offers in three days that week

Others have written extensively about why you shouldn’t view a
nonacademic job as a backup option or a failure, but sometimes it’s just
nice to know that people want to pay you. If you’re striking out on the
academic job market, there are plenty of other options out there. So it
goes.

[^1]: People have criticized the term quit lit for focusing on the
    individual and [ignoring the systemic
    forces](https://www.wihe.com/article-details/74/quit-lit-is-about-labor-conditions)
    that contribute to many people’s decision to leave academia. I am
    very persuaded by this argument, but no one has yet coined a
    similarly catchy and succinct alternative.

[^2]: I’m using the term nonacademic instead of industry, which is
    usually presented as the alternative to academic jobs for people
    with a PhD, because I applied for jobs in both the private and
    public sectors.

[^3]: I considered Kilgore Trout’s intended epitaph from *Breakfast of
    Champions* as a title for this post, but decided it was both too
    obscure and too bleak: he tried.
